Node.js

Node.js is a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine.
It allows developers to execute JavaScript outside the browser, mainly
for building backend applications and APIs.

Node.js uses an event-driven and non-blocking I/O architecture.
It is particularly useful for I/O-heavy applications such as REST APIs,
real-time applications, chat applications, and microservices.


Event Loop

The Node.js Event Loop allows Node.js to handle asynchronous operations
without blocking the main JavaScript thread.

JavaScript code is executed on the call stack. When Node.js encounters
an asynchronous operation such as a file operation, timer, or network
request, the operation can be handled outside the main JavaScript
execution flow.

When the asynchronous operation completes, its callback is scheduled
for execution. The Event Loop checks whether the call stack is available
and processes pending callbacks.

The Event Loop is one of the key mechanisms that allows Node.js to
handle many concurrent I/O operations efficiently.


Express

Express.js is a lightweight web framework for Node.js.

Express is commonly used to build REST APIs and web applications.
It provides features for routing, middleware, request handling,
response handling, and error handling.

Developers can create HTTP endpoints such as GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE
using Express.

Example:

app.get("/users", (req, res) => {
    res.json({ message: "Users list" });
});


Middleware

Middleware is a function that runs during the request-response
lifecycle of an Express application.

Middleware has access to the request object, response object, and
the next function.

Middleware can be used for logging, authentication, authorization,
validation, request processing, and error handling.

The next() function passes control to the next middleware or route
handler.

Example:

app.use((req, res, next) => {
    console.log(req.method, req.url);
    next();
});

The typical Express request flow is:

Request
    ↓
Middleware
    ↓
Middleware
    ↓
Route Handler
    ↓
Response